---
layout: post
title: Getting Shit Done (mid-2013 edition)
---
I've been a (bad) student of the Getting Things Done&trade; philosophy for a long
time now. I still remember when I first read the original book. It was
September 2005, when I spent a week on the Greek island of Naxos with my
(not-quite, at that point) wife and father-in-law. I remember getting very
cross at the introduction, but resolving to stick with it.

Since then, I've fallen off the wagon and gotten back on the horse more often
than I can remember. That's more of a reflection of me than the system; when I
follow it, I'm more productive. I'm currently, mostly, on the horse and I've
got a specific system I work with. It largely involves three tools:

* [OmniFocus]() as my 'trusted system' which contains all the stuff I want to
  do.

* [Evernote]() which has a few roles. One is as a tickler file, one is as a
  general searchable store of material, and the final is as a daily journal.

* Pen and paper. Yeah, I know. How quaint. If it's any consolation, it's lots
  of different coloured pens, and sometimes it's Moleskine jotters.

So. How do I put together these tools in such a way that I know what I would
like to be doing *right now*? Well, I've been reading a pile of different
things over the years, about flow, about software development methodologies,
and about getting stuff done. What I've wound up with is something of a mix of
these tools. I hope it's an effective blend of these methodologies, rather than
me picking and choosing what I like from each, losing the whole. I'd appreciate
your feedback.

## Trusted System

OmniFocus acts as my trusted system. Anything I need to do, or would like to do
at some point, or currently think I might like to do, goes in there. I keep it
running all the time on my laptop, and any time I think of something else I
need to do, or have an idea about something, I hit `ctrl-alt-space`, write it
down and carry on. Whatever I've captured winds up in my inbox.

Similarly, when I'm dealing with other inboxes (email, Twitter messages, GitHub
notifications, SMS messages, bits of paper, iPhone photos, Evernote inbox,
voicemails, my morning pages, my brain, oh dear, I have too many inboxes!), I
have a very simple system:

* If it can be dealt with in a couple of minutes (in other words, the
  processing overhead would be a significant portion of the overall task time),
  then I just deal with it.

* Otherwise, it goes into my OmniFocus inbox -- and gets removed from the other
  inbox -- so that it can be triaged and dealt with appropriately. For emails,
  I'll either process them on my laptop, where the clip-o-tron neatly gets them
  into OmniFocus, or I'll process them on my iPhone, forwarding anything that
  needs dealing with to the OmniFocus sync server. Text messages get
  copy-and-pasted, photos can be forwarded, too.

So every non-trivial task that I do winds up in my trusted system. When I'm out
and about, I can easily capture tasks with my iPhone or iPad. In principle, I
could talk to Siri and my reminders would be consumed by OmniFocus, but I've
still to convince Siri to understand my Scottish accent, especially after a
beer or two.

Capture is sorted. Once I've captured everything new, the next stage is to sort
things in to projects and actionable items that take that project towards
completion.

### Projects

So, what is a project? A project in terms of Getting Things Done is a smaller
thing than you might think. It's just something where there's more than one
atomic action needed to take it to completion. "Atomic" is perhaps too strong,
but it's definitely something that feels indivisible, and that you can do in a
single session. Personally, I find it's better to split a project into really
small tasks, than it is to have a single 'task' that lingers for days.

The trouble is that I end up with a lot of projects. After all, "change my
bike's rear tyre" is, strictly speaking, a project. Before I can actually
perform the repair, I need to buy a new inner tube, and I need to get the inner
tube and tools into the office, where my poor bike with its flat back tyre is
languishing. Then, and only then, can I actually change the tyre on my bike
(and then cycle home instead of taking the bus!)

### Context

That brings up the idea of context. It's an important concern in Getting Things
Done, but I personally find it less significant. Most of the resources I need
to do the things I need to do are "my computer", and "my computer with Internet
access". There are others -- being out and about, making phone calls, being at
home or being in the office -- but I'm currently quite relaxed about contexts.
If I need a scarce resource to complete a task, that's the context. Otherwise,
I tend to categorise it as being work ('Office') or personal ('Anywhere',
because I occasionally do personal things in my 'lunch hour', too).

### OMG IT'S FULL OF PROJECTS!!!1!

Back to projects. I'm not so bad at realising that something on my list as a
single action really has multiple actions and, therefore, is a project.
However, I'm sometimes resistant to admitting it, and making the change,
because it generates yet another project. And this system generates a lot of
projects. I mean a *lot* of projects.

This is daunting, and it's one of the reasons I've fallen off the GTD wagon in
the past. With the sheer breadth of projects, there's a fear to turning
something into yet another project. So I tend to wind up with a bunch of single
action lists, which are really projects in disguise. Which, in turn means that
I don't get to tick off -- complete -- things until multiple steps are
completed, which in turn is demoralising, which creates
fear/disinterest/resentment in the system in the first place.

In the past, I've made use of groups in OmniFocus to group projects by role,
which makes things a little more manageable. I've got a top level group for
each of:

* 'Work' where I put all the projects that are directly related to work. In
  there, I've a group for each client, and a group for internal, which is
  mostly admin.

* 'Family' where household projects, stuff to do with the kids, shopping, gift
  ideas, potential days out, car maintenance, etc, goes.

* 'Me', which is all the stuff to do with me, personally, or stuff that doesn't
  really fit in elsewhere. This includes regular maintenance ('get a haircut'),
  personal development and super secret projects.

* 'Maintenance', which is maintenance of the system itself. This includes daily
  chores for keeping my trusted system in check, weekly reviews, etc.

That helps a bit; I tend to work in relatively isolated modes -- work, home or
'me' time -- but I still wind up with dozens of projects under each "role",
which still creates some fear in dealing with the to do list effectively.

I'm also slightly uneasy about personal development and super secret projects
being dumped under personal, especially since I rarely devote any "me" time to
actually getting on with my to do list. Personal development is, technically,
important to work, too, and hopefully one or two of the super secret projects
will be worth devoting work time to, too. The trouble is it's tricky to admit
that when client work == money...

In the past, I've had trouble with the distinction between 'Me' and 'Family'
projects, too; to which role does, "install XMBC on the Raspberry PI" belong?
I'm not sure the rest of the family really cares about being able to stream
random stuff to the TV, so maybe it is a personal thing. But equally, we have a
regular discussion about enabling music through the house, and this would help
solve that. So I've considered merging these roles. But the sheer number of
projects that would wind up in a single role as a result is ... daunting.

I also have this nasty habit of having bright ideas. I have these ideas
(usually in the shower in the morning) and decide they are the best thing ever,
and that I must work on this idea right now (sometimes I have the patience to
finish showering and getting dressed first). I'll generate projects and a pile
of next actions, planning how I'm going to take over the world.

And then I'll get started building out the boilerplate Rails app that I'll use
to prototype it. By the time I've -- yet again -- put together all the pieces
needed by a responsible Rails application, usually experimenting with something
new and shiny while I'm at it, I've lost steam (or I'm interrupted by what I
should actually be doing at the time). And the project languishes. But it's
still there in my trusted system, reminding me that I haven't completed it.

It all boils down to: too many projects! So what can I do to feel comfortable
and honest about capturing things as projects, with atomically completable next
actions, while managing the sheer volume of projects?

## The Pivot

For collaborating with colleagues and clients, I've been using
[Pivotal Tracker]() for years. Its process is based around the Pivotal Way,
which is a roughly Scrum-like Agile methodology. There are two key components
from Pivotal Tracker I want to make use of:

* the story; and

* the backlog.

Let's take the story first.

### The Story

A story is a single unit of deliverable work, preferably one that delivers
business value. It feels to me like this maps well to a 'project' in Getting
Things Done. (Certainly, when I'm using Tracker for client collaboration, every
new story I work on becomes a project in OmniFocus). The individual tasks that
Tracker allows you to track on a story map onto the actions of the GTD project.

Stories tend to have a description. One of the Agile ways is to headline the
description of a story in the Connextra format:

> As a `role`,
> I would like to `do some particular task`
> in order to `deliver some business value`.

It's slightly tricky to formulate some projects into this sort of format. e.g:

> As `me`,
> I would like to `get a haircut every couple of months`,
> in order to `refrain from looking like my evolutionary ancestors`.

The Getting Things Done system has a different take on it. Each project should
have a vision. How it **feels** to have completed the project. Some kind of
visualisation of what the completed project will mean. (This kind of thinking
suits our brains, apparently.)

The thing I've taken from this is that my projects like to have a description
of some kind. I'm currently trialling the 'vision' version of them in the notes
of the project, and making sure the notes from the project are visible each
time I'm looking at a project.

### The Backlog

The backlog is the collection of stories. It's split into three parts in
Pivotal Tracker:

* *Current*, which contains the stories that you're actively working on and
  have committed to achieving in the current sprint. (A sprint is a fixed unit
  of time in Agile methodologies -- usually a week or two -- and is part of the
  larger planning/doing/reflecting cycle. As an aside, I really dislike the
  word choice, because it implies an anaerobic, unsustainable, challenging
  thing, but then expects you to repeat it every cycle...)

* *Backlog*, which is a roughly ordered list of projects that you haven't
  committed to doing in this current cycle of work, but that you're planning to
  tackle next, once the current stuff is done. Generally speaking, these
  projects are already pretty well defined (a vision, a reasonable set of next
  actions, and an idea of how long the project will take to complete). Barring
  any changes in priority, these are the projects that I'll be working on next
  when the stuff in current is complete.

* *Icebox*, which is a dumping ground for everything else. It's the things that
  haven't yet been fleshed out, haven't been committed to, the crazy ideas, the
  Someday/Maybes.

This is a good way to keep things manageable. There's space for all the whacky
ideas that I might want to consider in the future (icebox). There's a small,
manageable, set of projects that I am committing to working on in the next week
(or two), and there's a place to keep the projects that are somewhere in
between, as they're fleshed out, prioritised and committed to.

### Applying to OmniFocus

So, let's try applying this to my OmniFocus trusted system. For each top level
role (or, in the case of work, for each client), I have the projects I'm
actively working on at the top level of that group, then I have a sub-group for
Backlog, and a single action list for the icebox. So I wind up with a structure
along the lines of:

    Personal
    -> Fix my bike's back tyre
       -> ...
    -> Research and contemplate buying a new iPad
       -> ...
    -> Single Actions
       -> ...
    -> Backlog
       -> Set up a NAS at home
          -> ...
       -> Write a scraper for the current price of villas at Center Parcs
          -> ...
       -> Single Actions
          -> ...
    -> Icebox
       -> ...

So the top level has the projects that I'm currently actively working on
(fixing the back tyre on my bike -- which has turned into an extensive project,
mostly revolving around trying to figure out where Emily has hidden my tyre
levers! -- and contemplating buyig a new iPad). At the end of the current list
is a single action list that contains things which are genuinely single
actions. Order is important here, which I'll cover later on, but I consider
pushing projects to completion to be more important than tidying up single
actions.

Then there's the backlog. It's similar to the top level current list, just
containing projects that I haven't yet committed to doing in the next couple of
weeks.

And finally, there's the Icebox. In OmniFocus, I use a single action list to
represent it -- because there's usually no dependencies amongst the items --
and I mark it as paused, so none of the items in it show up as available. I can
still chuck projects in there, whether I've fleshed them out or not.

### Focus

There are distinct advantages to this layout. Mostly, it's about focus. When
doing my daily planning and review sessions, I do the collection and processing
as usual, but when I'm planning my priorities for the day, I only need to
review the 'current' projects for whatever role I'm fulfilling that day. It's a
much smaller scope. On the flip side, I don't ever contemplate keeping
something *out* of my trusted system because I don't want to deal with it just
now.

### Scheduled Projects

I haven't yet worked out a good solution to scheduled projects. For example, I
have a recurring project each quarter to submit Rubaidh's VAT return. It's
definitely a project, in that it involved multiple discrete steps. Where does
it go? When it's time to complete the return, it should be in current. But when
it's not time to complete the return, it's not a priority at all and so should
stay in the icebox, really. However, with the icebox being a paused project,
even items with a deferred start date don't show up as available.

I've taken to compromising. Scheduled projects get moved into the backlog group
when they're soon to be current, and get moved into current when they actually
become available. Then, when they're completed, the recurred project gets
chucked back in the icebox. It's not perfect, but it'll do for now.

## Weekly review

The weekly review is the time to think more strategically, to review what I'm
currently working on, the backlog, and the icebox for each role. As well as
examining each project to verify that it has an achievable next action, I'm
reflecting on priorities. Am I currently working on the most important thing?
Should my priorities be adjusted? Having completed a bunch of 'current'
projects, what am I going to move up from the backlog? What's going to move
from the icebox to the backlog and be fleshed out more? What's going to be
relegated back to the icebox, or dropped entirely?

After getting fully 'in' to zero -- reviewing all my inboxes, checking that
nothing has slipped through the cracks (usually receipts I need to enter for
business expenses, and other bits of paper, as it turns out) -- I review all
the projects that are 'current' or in the backlog. For each of these projects,
I'm usually asking myself:

* Is this project still in the right place relative to my current priorities?

* Does a project from the backlog need to be promoted to current? Or is it a
  project in current that no longer has the same sense of importance, and can
  be relegated back down to the backlog? If it can be relegated down to the
  backlog, then I can just move it there and forget about it for the rest of
  the review.

If the project is still current, then I ask myself:

* Is the next action really the next thing I can be doing to move this project
  forward? Is it too big? Can I split it up? Do the subsequent actions
  currently seem reasonable?

* If the project has stalled (i.e. I haven't made any progress on it since the
  last review), why? Is there a hidden next action? Am I blocked on something
  external? Is it not really a priority? Or am I avoiding it for some reason?
  (And if so, how can I help myself to get back on track?)

For the most part, I can constrain the detailed review to the current and
backlog items. I scan the icebox for each role for two reasons:

* Checking to see if there's anything that would like to be promoted to the
  backlog -- something I intend to get done in a couple of weeks' time -- or
  all the way up to current (it's getting attention in the next week). At this
  point, I then need to treat it in the same way as I've outlined above.

* Checking for things that are no longer relevant. Since relevancy is a
  subjective idea, and my subjective opinions vary over time, I've recently
  started capturing items that I remove from the icebox on a page in Evernote.
  It's a catalogue of ideas that I once thought were important, then discarded
  as not being a priority. The hope is, that way, I don't keep having the same
  ideas, and keep failing to execute on them. I can either note:

  * this is a bad idea, and I remember why, because I've written it down; or

  * this idea keeps reoccurring. Perhaps there's something to it after all?

That way, I'm regularly reviewing my crazy ideas to see that they're still
relevant, but still not important.

Then there's all this nonsense about being bold and creative proscribed in
David Allen's book. I tend to be neither bold, nor creative, when it's demanded
of me. These things happen more spontaneously...

## Limits

There's a notion from the Kanban software development methodology (which I
assume comes from 'Level the production' in Toyota's original Kanban
implementation). It's about limiting the work in progress at each stage of a
process. For example, in a software development scenario, you can limit the
number of features that are concurrently in development, or at QA, or waiting
to be activated in production. These limits create back-pressure in the system
and ensure the overall process doesn't wind up with a build up of items at one
stage in the process. Usually, this will help to identify constraints within a
system, but I like to use it for a different reason: to manage my sanity.

If I have a lot of plates all spinning at once, I tend to spend an appreciable
amount of time context switching between them, or working on the project that
isn't the most important thing right now, or just plain procrastinating because
I've got too much to do.

I also have a bad habit of not finishing projects, whether by putting the last
lick of paint on something, or actually getting a new feature into production,
or fixing that last wee bug, or redrafting and publishing a blog post, I
struggle to finish work. There are three reasons that I'm aware of in my psyche
for this:

* Interest. Once I've solved a problem in my head, it's, well, it's a solved
  problem, isn't it? Communicating the details of the solution, and
  transforming it into robust, working code that's fit for production is
  relatively dull. (I want minions to do my bidding!)

* Closure. Apparently, the Perceiving part of my INFP personality type doesn't
  like to be pushed into a corner, to make decisions, to close off other
  opportunities, to commit. I was a little sceptical of this, but I suppose I'm
  only moderately 'perceiving', and it does seem to fit, so...

* Fear. What if I deliver something as finished and it's *wrong* or *not good
  enough*? What if I'm ridiculed for it? What if people judge me (poorly) on
  the quality of what I've built? That's my version of perfectionism.

I need help to get projects across the finish line. So I'm playing around with
work-in-progress (WIP) limits. For each role in my life, I can only have so
many projects in current. The size of the project doesn't really matter -- I
can always pull another from the top of the backlog if I run out of projects in
current -- but I'm only allowed a fixed maximum of projects that are currently
active. In order to start on something new, I need to complete an existing
project, or make an active decision to drop/defer it.

The number of WIP projects varies depending on the role, but since I'm only one
person, I try to keep to a soft limit of two and a hard limit of three for each
role. (There's both a soft and a hard limit, so that I can accommodate
'emergencies' in each role.)

This is the one part of the system that so far is proving hard to keep to. I
have one particular client who is *way* further up the 'Perceiving' scale than
me, and I take on the balancing 'Judging' role there, frantically trying to
reduce the work in progress and drive things into production. But I have a hard
time taking on that role, so we do have ... one or two more projects in
progress than is strictly sensible.

## What's the next action?

This is all well and good. I have a trusted system which contains everything
that I currently think I would like to do. And it's organised in a manageable
way so as not to seem utterly daunting. How do I actually decide what to do
next?

I primarily plan my work for a day by a 'Today' perspective in OmniFocus. This
is built by showing the 'context' view mode, with actions grouped and sorted by
their start date. I've then collapsed the 'start any time' group, and by
default, all the groups that start in the future. All that's left is actions
that I've committed to a start date on, which is today or earlier.

There are, more often than I'd like, still tasks hanging over from yesterday
which I haven't completed for one reason or another. The first task is to
reassess them. Am I definitely going to do them today? In which case, I change
the start date to 'Today' and they become part of today's to do list. If not,
then I remove the start date entirely and allow them to be reassessed as part
of my regular review process.

Then it comes down to two things:

* Which role(s) am I fulfilling today? Which hat am I wearing today? I'll
  typically arrange my diary so that I'm dedicating full days to client work,
  and I normally work this out in advance for the month, so at work, I know
  which role I'm focusing on.

* What's current in that role's project list?

In the morning's planning session, I will take a set of actions that I think I
can accomplish today from those project(s), and I'll set their 'start date' to
being today. (Helpfully, OmniFocus lets you enter "Today" as a start time and
interprets it appropriately. More on that below.)

There are also other tasks. Things like posting letters, getting a haircut,
catching up with business finances, software maintenance, hardware maintenance,
remembering to take my dried frog pills. These tend to be reoccurring tasks, so
they show up automatically in today.

And there's usually one or two other little tasks that I'd like to get done
sometime through the day -- writing my NaNoWriMo words count, for example --
which get a start date of 'today'.

Now I have a list of items that I am committed to achieving today, and I have a
perspective in OmniFocus which shows me those items. However, it lacks some
order. Basically, the order in the list reflects the order of the projects in
the project tree of OmniFocus. This isn't necessarily optimal, and I've worked
around it a little by realising the start date is actually a time stamp. When
you order the perspective by start date, it will also order by start time.

Anything I've given a start date of 'Today' will get a start time of midnight
today and so will show up at the head of the list. I've exploited this to help
me roughly order my list of priorities for the day:

* Anything that I ought to think about before I go into work in the morning
  gets a start time of 6am. OmniFocus helpfully allows you to type in `6a`,
  which expands to `6am today`. Since I'm rarely up before 6am, these are
  usually when I'm scheduling in advance, so `6a tomorrow` gets them to show up
  at the appropriate time. Most often, these are recurring items ('remember to
  take your dried frog pills with breakfast').

* Anything that I need to deal with absolutely first thing when I get into the
  office (panicked emails from a client at 2am) gets a start time of 8am.

* Regular work for the day usually gets a start time of `9a`, but if I'm
  looking to order the list a bit more granularly, I'll play around with that a
  bit.

* Anything I'm looking to do at lunch time (errands, getting a haircut, posting
  letters) gets a start time of `12p`.

* Things that I want to do at the tail end of the day -- sometimes small tasks
  when I'm tired, or reviews -- get a time of `4p`.

* Finally, anything I want to do at home in the evening gets a time of `6p`.

There are a few advantages to this:

* My today view gets a semblance of order and of priority. I've got planning,
  urgent, general acting, lunch break things, review and evening tasks. I
  should be able to work through the list more or less in order.

* If the today view is daunting, I can switch to showing only 'available'
  tasks, which will hide the items that I don't intend to do until later in the
  day. They'll show up when they're available.

* When a new set of tasks becomes available, I'll get a Growl notification
  about it. This can help to remind me what stage of the day I'm at, if I've
  gotten lost in some code. (In other words, when the 6pm tasks show up as
  available and I'm not yet on a train home, I know my dinner is in the cat!)

## Unplanned, but urgent

Sometimes things crop up during the day. Servers die, causing widespread panic,
fire fighting and an end to the productive day. Clients phone up (sometimes not
the one I'm supposed to be working for that day with "one little thing"). And
sometimes I just get distracted. I wind up seeing another bit of code near
where I'm working that's crazy and needs 'refactoring' out of existence (what
was 6-months-ago me thinking?!), or I have a shiny new idea and spend 20
minutes writing about it.

It's inevitable, but I'd like to track these in some way. If there's something
I've just done, but didn't plan to do today, I'll use the Quick Entry tool in
OmniFocus to record it. I'll note that I started it today, that it's already
complete, how long I spent on it and that it was unplanned. I'll assign it to a
context and project (there's almost always a single action 'current' list for
each of my roles, which is where this sort of thing gets placed.) And I'll
immediately mark it as complete. There are two reasons why I do this:

* I get some sense that I've achieved something, even on the days when my
  hare-brained mind has wandered off on twenty different tangents. Chances are
  some of these tangents will have future value -- maybe learning a new tool,
  or improving my productivity in vim -- even if they didn't contribute to my
  deadlines today.

* I get some feedback on the time I'm spending on planned vs unplanned
  activities. Do I need to introduce more slack into my system to allow for
  them while still getting my commitments completed? Could I better manage and
  reduce the impact of interruptions?

## Pens and Paper

This is the point in the day when OmniFocus takes a sharp exit and my trusty
pen & notebook come to the fore. I can't explain it, but I'm more productive
when I have a hand written to do list beside me when I'm working. There's
something about it that helps keep the focus, and it's somewhat gratifying to
hand write those check marks, score things off, draw little daggers next to the
task that just won't die.

My daily activity sheet is stolen straight from the Pomodoro technique, more or
less. It's got a few things on it. At the top of the page is today's date, and
the role(s) I'm focusing on today.

Next up is 'Goals'. This is a high level overview of what I want to achieve
over the course of the day. Usually, it's one or two items -- something to do
with the client I'm working for, and something to do with personal development.
This month, it's mostly been along the lines of:

> ### Goals
>
> * Make progress on project `X` for client `Y`.
>
> * Write my NaNoWriMo quota for today.
>
> * Go explore London!

(I've been at a variety of conferences in London this past week.)

The idea is to set the tone for the day, to remind myself what's most important
today. It also reminds me that there's some balance to the day. When I'm
already two thirds of the way through the day and I'm still working on the
first of the goals, perhaps it's time to change tack, work on something else
for a bit.

Then it's down to activities. These are the tasks that I'll be spending most of
my day on, usually in the form of Pomodoros. Some of these activities will be
directly transcribed from my the 'Today' view of OmniFocus, some will be a
bundle of related items grouped together to make up a single Pomodoro (usually
things like "reply to a bunch of emails").

Then there's final, currently empty, section called 'Unplanned and Urgent'
where I note interruptions that need action. They can then filter back into
OmniFocus as and when.

Depending on whether I'm at my desk in the office or, sometimes, just on my
mood, I can be bad at keeping up with the handwritten list, and the strict
Pomodoros. But when I do stick to it, I typically have a more productive day.

## Reporting

This is where I start to introduce Evernote into the system. Towards the end of
the day, I tend to resynchronise my paper system with OmniFocus, so my trusted
system is up to date with what I've done, and what I've still got to do. This
gives me the opportunity to extract some basic reports.

I've got a lump of Applescript (don't get me started on Applescript. I'm a
programmer and I can't make it do what I want it to do. What's with that?)
which collates the items that I've completed in OmniFocus that day. It formats
them and dumps them into an Evernote document with today's date. (Actually,
it's a little more flexible than that, because it allows me to do the same for
yesterday, and the previous couple of days, for when I need to catch up.)

The script will cleverly create, or append, a note in my 'journal' notebook on
Evernote, titled with the date of the completed items.

This works well, because I also keep a journal in Evernote. Each morning, I
start a new note in my journal notebook and title it with the current date
(using the apple-shift-D shortcut). In there, I'll tend to make a note of my
goals for the day (though since I've switched to using pen and paper for that,
I do so less often).

Throughout the day, I'll keep notes about what I'm working on. Just random,
unconnected thoughts. Regurgitating what I've just learned, notes on what I'm
doing, copy'n'paste of useful shell/Ruby/whatever snippets. Append only, might
be drivel, but it usually helps to keep my thoughts in order, and the
occasional useful thing shows up in searches later. (If it does, I usually try
and extract it to a separate note, as it's demonstrated its usefulness.)

So, when it's working well, I wind up with, in Evernote, a daily journal which
includes:

* goals for the day;

* notes as the day progresses; and

* a list of what I actually completed that day.

Pretty useful, as it turns out. It's especially useful when a client comes back
and says, "can you give me a breakdown of where we spent the time this month?"
And sometimes it's just useful as a way to jog my memory, or to provide more
general context for something else. (For example, I was trying to remember when
a particular event happened. For the life of me, I couldn't remember the date,
but I could remember what I was working on at the time. Searching for what I
was working on in Evernote sought out the date. Sometimes associative memories
can be exploited in useful ways!)

## Tickling

Having introduced how I use Evernote as a journal, and how I connect Evernote
with OmniFocus, it makes sense to talk about how else I use Evernote now. The
first thing is as a tickler file. "But what's a Tickler File?" I hear you ask.
I'm glad you asked because that's just what I was about to step back and
explain.

In the traditional Getting Things Done methodology, a Tickler File is a set of
suspended files (or maybe a portable equivalent) with forty-three folders in
it. The first set of folders are labelled '1' through '31', representing each
day of the month. The remaining twelve are labelled 'January' through
'December' for the months of the year.

The idea is simple. There's something on your plate that you need to deal with
at some point in the future, but you don't need to deal with it now. You want
to forget about it now, but you want to be reminded of it at the appropriate
time.

If it's something you need to be reminded about before the end of the current
month, stick it (or a representation of it -- i.e. a post-it note) into the
folder corresponding to the day that you want to be reminded about it. If it's
something to deal with in a subsequent month, stick that representation of the
item in the appropriate month.

At the start of each day, empty the contents of the folder for that day, and
deal with it as you would any other in box. At the start of each month, empty
that month's folder and, as expected, deal with it as you would any other in
box. (This might including processing items back into the tickler file for
particular days that month.)

I used to use OmniFocus to tackle my Tickler items, too. The trouble is that
this cluttered up my weekly review. The activities in the Tickler file are ones
that I've deliberately deferred, with a date before which I do not need to
review the item. So I don't need to review them on a weekly basis. I'm already
confident that I can forget about them until the date I've set.

Instead, I use reminders in Evernote, which keeps them out my weekly review,
but means I still get notified when items become relevant. I use a system
approximately equivalent to the folder-based tickler file: if I know the exact
date when something becomes relevant, I'll create a note in Evernote and add a
reminder for that date. If I'm not entirely sure when something will become
relevant, I'll make a conservative estimate -- the start of that month, a
couple of weeks before it might be relevant, whatever works.

When a reminder shows up in Evernote, I'll generally capture it -- with a link
to the note in Evernote -- in my OmniFocus in box, and process it as usual.

## Storage

It's not really about finding a place to store data, it's about finding a place
where you trust that you can retrieve information when you need it. For my
sins, this is split amongst three stores in reality:

* My email archive. It's not entirely true to say that, when an email comes in
  that requires some action, I add it to my OmniFocus in box and delete it.
  Instead of deleting it, I archive it. There are a few missing patches, due to
  carelessness, or a desire to create a clean slate, but I have most of the
  email I've sent or personally received since 1996. This is often an
  interesting corpus of data to search through... It's also why I quite like
  other inboxes to feed into my email in box, because I get a relatively small
  number of searchable corpuses.

* My local file system on my computer. By extension, this includes the content
  I've shared amongst multiple computers on Dropbox, and, to a lesser extent,
  the content that I've contributed to git repositories. (In the case of git
  repositories, Spotlight isn't capable of introspecting the past, so it's just
  the latest checked out copy that it returns results for.) Spotlight is pretty
  good. It's got a decent index of file content and, given the right
  encouragement, can often cough up the right result.

* Evernote, which can be a little more interesting, and sometimes a bit
  terrifying. I try to chuck everything into Evernote that I might want to
  retrieve in the future. In reality, I've no idea what I'll want to retrieve
  in future, so I try to chuck everything that doesn't have a home elsewhere
  into Evernote. This includes:

  * Things that I've read on the Internet that I might want to contemplate
    again. Usually whatever I've 'liked' in Instapaper, recipes that I've
    cooked (or would like to cook in the future), academic papers that I want
    to read.

  * Bits of paper that I get through the post. Pension statements, credit card
    statements, letters from HMRC. I have a Doxie scanner which makes it
    trivial to scan, then discard all the bits of paper I get through the post.
    They all go into Evernote and, when I'm well behaved, get tagged properly.

  * Receipts, when I'm out and about. There are two types of receipts that I
    need to keep track of: work expenses that I can reclaim, and personal
    expenses that I should be tracking when I'm keeping track of personal
    budgets (slightly off the wagon there). Either way, I take a photograph of
    the receipt, it winds up in my Evernote inbox, and I process it as usual.
    Plus, I can bin the random bit of paper I might otherwise have lost anyway.

  * And then just any random thoughts. (Like the dream I had last night about
    flying off to some desert context and helping Joel to provide medical
    support for some racing event. The details are hazy, mostly because of the
    sandstorm, I suspect.)

  * Scanned, or photographed, hand written notes. I've talked a bit about using
    pen and paper before to keep track of to do lists for the day. I tend to
    capture these in Evernote for posterity. I also photograph or scan any hand
    written notes (morning pages, mind maps, sketches of UI designs, anything
    else). The utterly terrifying thing is that Evernote does some form of
    character recognition on these notes and makes them searchable. (I
    suspect the 'clever' thing here is that it doesn't actually do character
    recognition, but something a little more abstract. It's able to boil the
    words you've written down to a number of possibilities, then allow you to
    search on that.)

The important thing is that information can be retrieved when I'm looking for
it. This is genuinely very useful. I'm confident that if I write something, or
type up a note, or chuck a file in Dropbox, I will be able to find it later. It
also allows me to relate content. When I search for 'Woburn', not only does my
trusted system remind me that I'm off to Center Parcs in Woburn Forest next
year, but that I had a Christmas meal in Woburn Abbey eleven years ago. (I
don't particularly appreciate this association, but hey ho.)

## Trusted System

I hope this gives you an insight into how I operate my trusted system,
capturing, processing, organising and doing things. There's nothing new here;
all I've done is taken other people's ideas, amalgamated them and produced a
system that I imagine works.

But you can't possibly trust somebody who's spent the afternoon writing about
his trusted system instead of doing what's actually important right now, can
you?
