---
layout: post
title: Walking
---
I suspect this is the longest pub crawl I've ever been on. So far, I've walked
nine miles, and I've another two miles before I make it back to the holiday
house we're staying in. Remarkably, this is only my second pint!

I do really enjoy walking. Sometimes listening to a podcast, other times with
music and, occasionally, with the imposed silence from my Bluetooth earphones
having run out of batteries.

The pace of walking is lovely -- measured, steady, mostly unaffected by the
landscape -- and it's delightful to get some fresh air, some sunlight, and to
see the beauty of the world.

There's beauty to be appreciated wherever you walk. It can be through the
centre of a busy city, along an empty country road, by a river, following along
a sea coast, or even taking a short cut through a dilapidated industrial estate.
Some are easier to appreciate the beauty than others, of course.

The city can be busy and it can be infuriating to share the footpath with slow,
bumbling, direction-less people. The air quality can be poor. There's an
increased risk of a suboptimal interaction with vehicles just due to the sheer
volume of them. But on the other hand, there's some stunning architecture to
admire, (counter intuitively, perhaps, since there are so many more people) you
tend to be left alone and there are plenty of routes to choose from without
getting lost.

(I have a thing. It's probably bordering on obsessive-compulsive. I don't like
to retrace my steps when I'm out walking. I like make sure I do a circuit,
taking a different route back from out. It's the same whether I'm walking,
running or cycling, though curiously not when I'm driving, now I think about
it. I think it's one of those 'been there, done that' kind of things.)

Similarly, the countryside has its ups and downs (pun entirely intended!). It's
full of interesting nature to look at -- creatures to observe, plants to
admire. It tends to be calmer, quieter, more natural. Strangers will greet you
on the way past. But on the other hand, the choice of proscribed routes is
smaller (at least when I'm down in England, which has a slightly less liberal
attitude to public rights of way), so it can be tricky to strike out at random
without retracing steps, or getting incredibly lost.

Wandering through a housing estate, or dilapidated industrial estate, can feel
risky. Do I feel safe here? But it can be home to some of the most impressive
visual sights. Peeling paintwork, old signs, or rusting machinery. Or, in
housing estates, looking at the variation in gardens, the way houses are
decorated or, OK, I admit it, surreptitiously looking in windows, seeing the
decor, noticing what people are watching on telivision. I find this to some
some of the most interesting landscapes I experience.

Walking is good exercise. It's gentle, so there's no real risk of damaging
anything, no matter your level of fitness. It doesn't require any specialist
equipment -- assuming you've already got a comfortable pair of shoes and, well,
clothes. You can do it just about anywhere, which makes it the perfect exercise
to do on holiday without exceeding your baggage allowance.

It elevates the heart rate. Whether it gets as far as the "aerobic zone"
depends on your personal level of fitness and the pace you're sustaining. But
it definitely beats being idle. And it's unlikely that it'll turn into
anaerobic exercise, which I understand is mostly counter-productive, unless you
know what you're doing. So you can burn off the excess calories and stay trim
with no real investment other than your time.

It's good for your mental health, too. Physiologically, getting out in the
fresh air is a good way to stock up on your vitamin D. I'm given to understand
that vitamin D deficiency has been linked to depression, as well as helping out
with various digestive functions and keeping your bones in tip-top shape. Your
body synthesises vitamin D from sunlight, so getting sunlight is for the win.

Moreover it's a chance to think and reflect. It's a time to re-centre, to be
mindful of the present moment. Focus on breathing. Focus on the plodding rhythm
of placing one foot in front of the other. Let your mind wander, if you like,
or meditate and focus on the breathing, if that's what you need.

Going for a walk and letting your mind have free reign is a good way to
figure out problems that are gnawing at you. Sometimes, deliberately not
thinking about things, and letting your R-mode brain have free reign, will help
you to make associations, cogitate, and hint to your L-mode brain what the
solution really is.

Walking can be a very social activity. Whether you're out for an afternoon amble
with a significant other, tromping across the beach with the kids, or out
rambling through the countryside with friends.

(I'd intended the last example to be something along the lines of a Women's
Institute group, who regularly rent a minibus to the Yorkshire moors, and head
off for an afternoon's rambling. It's followed by an afternoon cream tea at a
tearoom in the nearby village. Unfortunately, the image it actually conjured up
in my head was of Renton, Sick Boy, Begbie and Spud getting a train to the arse
end of Scotland with a carry out.)

It can be a chance to catch up with friends, have a chat while getting some
fresh air and talking about whatever is on your mind. It can be an opportunity
to learn, or teach, depending on your perspective on the situation. I love
walking along the beach -- usually plunging into rock pools to find creatures,
or sniffing flowers, or picking up rocks -- with my father in law for this very
reason. Wherever we are -- a vineyard in France, a peat bog in Harris, or a
beach on the Northumbrian coast -- he's full of knowledge about where we are:
the creatures we find, the birds nearby, the plant life, why the landscape is
shaped the way it is, the history of the place and the people who live nearby.

(He's often so knowledgeable, I've suggested he's just making things up but
that, sounding authoritative, he gets away with it. It's not true, he really is
that remarkable.)

On the flip side, it can be a very personal thing. Nothing but you, the road
ahead, your mind, and the thoughts that are bothering it. And, possibly a vague
sense that you really ought to be somewhere else, or doing something more
urgent (ignore that bit, it'll still be there when you get back). You can use
it as an opportunity to think, to catch up on podcasts or audio books, or just
to relax, enjoy yourself and walk.

That's what I tend to do. I rationalise the fact that I like to walk alone by
claiming that I walk quite fast. I have no problem sustaining 15 minutes per
mile (4 mph) over decent distances. And I tend to have a longer range for
walking than most people. I don't often have the time to walk ten miles, but
I'm perfectly happy to do so.

In reality, I just value the time I get to spend alone, to recharge, to think.
I've come to realise that, personally, it's one of my meditative strategies. I
focus on breathing, on being aware of my body -- my gait, the way my arms are
swinging -- and my surrounds. I'm 'mindfully aware' of the present moment. It's
ace.

So, stop reading this and go for a walk already!
