---
layout: post
title: A matter of perspective
---
Sometimes it's difficult to retain a sense of perspective when you're in the
trenches. I've talked about this several times in the past in the context of
software development, when I'm coaching colleagues, or even to myself when I
notice I'm having one of those days. However, it's only a couple of weeks ago
that I had the 'aha!' moment to see that it applies to other areas of my life,
too.

I've been a software developer on several mature, actively used software
projects with a healthy number of customers and the kinds of growth curves that
investors like. (I've also been a developer on smaller projects. The principle
is the same, but the scale amplifies it less.)

Typically, these products are large enough that the team, which started out as
a couple of people doing everything, starts to split out into roles. Two of
those roles are typically the core software development, and the customer
support. The end result of this is that the people on the software development
team become removed from the customers. This is bad on so many levels, but I'm
going to focus on one for now.

What do software developers spend much of their time dealing with? Bugs. Edge
cases that were never considered in the first place. Stuff that's just plain
wrong. Software that doesn't scale to meet the growth curve. The hacky bits
that are slowing down development and really need to be rewritten. Poor
decisions by the eejit that was fired six months ago. It's a constant reminder
that the software we've built is wrong, is substandard, is *not good enough*.

Sometimes, we even have bosses or other members of the team who (inadvertantly,
one would graciously assume) reinforce these feelings. Developers are chastised
for introducing bugs, singled out personally for causing performance
regressions, often by generally well meaning managers who have poor people
skills, or by non-technical people who don't understand the complexities of
the situation.

(Pro tip: nobody can influence how you feel about something -- either
positively or negatively -- it's your own head taking an external stimuli,
inferring some meaning from it, and having some emotional response to it.)

It's not all doom and gloom, of course. There's no feeling quite like fixing a
bug. Finally vanquishing some pernicious issue that's vexed the team for weeks.
(And when it's a production-only issue involving concurrency, scaling and
locks, it's incredibly satisfying to figure it out!) There's definitely a
seratonin hit from launching new features, too. Seeing the code you've been
working on for months hit production at last and work just right is an awesome
experience.

But then there's the months that you spent implementing that new feature,
thinking it would never end. Those endless retrospectives after the estimate
has slipped yet again, where you're feeling guilty for not meeting
expectations, not being good enough. Taking things personally -- because that's
how your brain is inferring meaning from the external stimuli -- when
colleagues are really just criticising the code (not the person).

It's a tough life being a programmer, eh?

Of course, the same piece of software is winning awards. Customers love it. It
genuinely is a fantastic solution to the problem domain. Yes, OK, there are
edge cases which trip up the odd person, and there are one or two people who
are never going to be happy, but for 99% of the users, it's an awesome piece of
software.

It's tricky, when you're at the coal face, to see that you're building
something cool. All you see are the bugs, the deficiencies, the lurking
horrors. You use the system so often (who doesn't test stuff through the
browser, just to be on the safe side?) that you know some operations are
irritating, repetetive and slow. (You're not using the system in the same way
as the customers, which is probably why it irritates you more than them.)

It's (relatively) easy to step back, take a bit of perspective, and see this at
work. It's much, much harder to do it on a personal level. When you're living
with something every day, it's easy to spot the quirks, the foibles, the
suboptimal design decisions. And it's equally easy to dismiss the good things,
the positive difference it makes to our world.

Take our flat, for example. Our flat's common access stair is falling apart --
and the repairs are going to cost us a significant portion of the value of the
house to put right. It's in dire need of some attention on the decoration side,
too. It doesn't catch the sun most of the day (I've spent entire days in there
thinking it's dull and miserable outside, when it's been a lovely sunny day
outside). And it's getting a bit small for two adults and two kids.

But we've got a delightful bathroom with a fantastic shower. I'm never
satisfied with a shower when we go on holiday because it's not as good as home.
We've got a well specified kitchen, with an awesome cooker that I love to bits.
(Most of the rest of the kitchen awesomeness is portable -- my favourite knives
for example -- so that doesn't really count.) We've got room in our bedroom for
the largest standard bed size that exists (super king). (Though I still only
wind up with a sliver at the side most nights.)

It genuinely is a lovely place to live, but it's difficult to remember that
some days.

More personally, the same thing is true of my son, Malcolm. It's difficult to
remember, sometimes, when you're in the thick of a situation and he's doing
what he does best when he's bored: rolling on the floor, kicking his sister.
It's tricky to see the big picture when yet again, for the fourth morning in a
row (and it's only Thursday!), he's spent twenty minutes standing in the shower
-- when we're all trying to get out to school/work -- and he's not even started
washing with soap.

The trouble is that these impressions are all immediate and short term. Malcolm
is a smart, hard working, considerate, compassionate kid. I am very proud of
him, and I know that other people sing his praises. I know for sure that he
already makes a positive difference to other people's lives. He makes a net
positive difference to my life. I can see how much his friends like him (and he
seems to have a way with the girls!). And I can see how incredibly important he
is to his grandparents. In short, he's awesome.

But some days it's difficult to appreciate that.

The trouble is, the same is true of me, personally. I drink too much. I obsess
about controlling silly things -- my weight?! -- because it feels like
everything else is out of control. I let people down. I'm poor at communicating
effectively. I commit to more work than I'm capable of doing. I write software
that is delivered late and has bugs. And I've got some really fucking noisy
gremlins in my head, telling me I'm not important, I'm not good enough, I'm not
worthy.

But you know what? Other people say nice things about me. People continue to
work with me, getting value for money from my technical abilities. I provode a
decent income for my family. I spend quality time with the kids -- relatively
"unique" contributions like teaching Malcolm to climb, teaching him about
electronics, enthusing him about computing. And my wife, Annabel, must persist
in putting up with me for some reason.

In short, it's hard to see the big picture. It's hard to think strategically
when you're in the trenches, acting tactically. It's much easier to be reactive
and do the simplest thing that could possibly work in the situation.

So what do you do about it? Breathe, damn it. When you're in a situation where
all you can see is the coal face, and you're getting angry and frustrated,
stop. Take a step back, breathe (mindfully focus on that breath, which we'll
talk about another day) and think of the context, the bigger picture. Why is
that code like that? Why is Malcolm acting the way he is? Why am I reacting
badly to this situation? Pause, breathe, think about it, then act.
