---
layout: post
title: A week of cooking
excerpt: |
  We've been on holiday in the Northumbrian coast for the past ten days. I
  volunteered to be chef for the week. I really enjoy cooking, but between work
  and family constraints, I don't get the chance so often. I thought it would
  be fun to write up the week's cooking in the same style as Nigel Slater's
  Kitchen Diaries.
---
This week is a family holiday in the Northumbrian coast. I volunteered to be
chef for the week. I really enjoy cooking but between work and family
constraints I rarely get the opportunity, so I've been looking forward to the
opportunity. There have been six of us here all week -- the maternal
grandparents (afftectionately known as Mogie and Baba), Annabel, the two kids
and me. In addition, there have been various extra friends and family visiting
through the week.

We prefer the kids to eat with us, but if they're particularly tired (no nap
days for Emily!) or we wind up eating particularly late, they eat separately
and head to bed. Usually, it's leftovers from the previous day, but there's
always the fall-back option of pasta 'blobs' (ravioli or tortellini).

## Preparation

Since we're in a small, relatively remote, village, I figured that being
prepared was a good plan. I brainstormed a few recipe ideas, mostly repeats of
things I've cooked in the past 6 months, along with a couple of 'simple' meals
so I could skive off:

* Roast chicken for Sunday lunch, with the usual accoutrements of potatoes and
  veggies.

* A chilli con carne, using one of the kits from the Cool Chilli Company.

* Spinach and Ricotta Cannelloni. This started out as lasagne, but I fancied
  trying something a bit different, and I haven't made this for years.

* Fish pie. I'd made one recently for the same audience and it went down pretty
  well, so I thought I'd repeat it, varying a couple of things.

* Haggis, neeps and tatties. Always a good fall-back meal.

* Spaghetti bolognese.

* Boiled Ham in coca cola, with parsnip, potato and porcini gratin. I cooked
  this a few months back for a family Sunday dinner and they went together
  pretty well.

* Pumpkin risotto, mostly because we had pumpkins for carving (we're a bit
  behind schedule with celebrations this year -- I'm sure we'll be letting off
  fireworks in a week or two!) and it's a good way to use up the spare flesh.

With that, a couple of meals out and some leftovers, chances are we'll have
enough to keep us going for the time. Everyone seemed happy with the selection,
so it was just a case of placing an order online with Tesco for the ingredients
and having them delivered to the house shortly after we were scheduled to
arrive.

This worked remarkably well. It was pretty straightforward to turn the ideas
into approximate recipes, then create a shopping list for the ingredients. And
the delivery turned up just after we'd arrived and unpacked, without any crazy
substitutions.

## Friday, 1st November

> Arriving; a new kitchen; Joe, Charlie and Pete staying; kids eat past blobs;
> we have tagliatelle bolognese.

After a long and noisy car journey down -- Emily didn't sleep, so there was a
chorus of her screeching "You're not helping!" for much of the journey until I
took over driving instead of "entertaining" -- we were looking for something
simple for dinner. Joe & Charlie were driving up from Cornwall, too, so their
arrival time was a bit fluid.

After unpacking the Tesco delivery, we found some pasta 'blobs' for the kids,
and made them an early dinner. Meanwhile, I started making up a tagliatelle
bolognese. This was, as it turns out, the hallmark of the week, and what I
enjoyed most about the cooking. Two particular things:

* I took my time. I wasn't rushing anything, prepared things in advance, and
  felt generally entirely in control of the cooking process. It helps that
  nobody was that fussed about when we ate dinner -- crisps and dips could
  always fill a gap -- so even if things took longer, it wasn't a big deal.

* I didn't strictly follow a recipe. I'd done a little research in advance, so
  I knew the relative proportions I was aiming towards, and I'm familiar enough
  with each of the processes that I could wing it. This was the most freeing
  aspect, and what destressed it most. Instead of worrying about exactly
  following a set of rules, I could just feel my way towards the right thing,
  noting texture, taste, colour, and responding to it.

In terms of the bolognese sauce, I completely made it up. Which makes writing
it up a week later a bit tricky. :) I had a kilogram of beef mince to cook, so
I started out by browning it in batches in a couple of frying pans. I often
forget that over-filling a frying pan when you're browning meat is a daft thing
to do, but this time I experimented with different batch sizes to see what
works well.

In a large, deep, pan, I sweated some chopped carrots, celery and onion in
garlic-infused olive oil. (I seem to have used most of the bottle of this stuff
through the week; it's delicious!) I was aiming to keep the temperature such
that the onions softened and went translucent, instead of caramelising. I'm not
really sure why you choose to do one or t'other, but it seemed like the right
thing to do.

After about ten minutes or so, the veggies were looking just nice. I added in
some dried oregano (I couldn't find any fresh!), and stirred that in for a few
seconds. I'm sure that frying dried herbs for a few seconds is a good thing to
do -- it certainly smells delicious -- so I tend to add them at this stage.
Then I mixed in the browned mince and a 'squeeze' (probably closer to half the
tube!) of tomato paste. Everything got mixed up well, then I added two tins of
chopped tomatoes, and a little water (washing out the tins of tomatoes). There
was an open bottle of red wine, so I chucked in a splash of that for good
measure. :)

Once it was back up to the boil, I covered it with a lid, turned it down to a
light simmer and left it 'til the kids were in bed and everyone arrived. After
that, it was just a case of checking the seasoning, boiling up some fresh egg
tagliatelle, and sticking a garlic bread in the oven. When the tagliatelle was
ready and drained, I tossed it in a splash of the garlic-infused olive oil for
good measure.

Everyone seemed to enjoy it. As usual, I didn't even consider pudding. Mogie
rescued that with a delicious fruit salad.

## Saturday, 2nd November

Joe, Charlie & Pete here, for the life of me, I can't remember what we had!

## Sunday, 3rd November

Joe & Charlie here for lunch before heading off; Pete heads off in the morning.
The roast chicken Sunday lunch.

## Monday, 4th November

Just the core family. I think today was Haggis, neeps & tatties with the whisky
sauce.

## Tuesday, 5th November

Just the core family. Today was fish pie.

## Wednesday, 6th November

Meal out at lunchtime, then snacking for dinner.

## Thursday, 7th November

> Large family lunch out at Beadnell Towers with Judy, Alex, Kathy & Chris;
> Kathy & Chris stay over; I made pumpkin risotto for supper.

## Friday, 8th November

> Joe & Charlie return; and it's chilli con carne for dinner.

## Saturday, 9th November

> Pancakes for second breakfast; spinach and ricotta canelonni for dinner.

Breakfasts are always a bit awkward because we all live to different schedules.
Malcolm and Emily are usually up and active by 06:30. Depending on how noisy
they are -- the living room is upstairs, the bedrooms downstairs -- running
around the place, the rest of the family will be up around 8 or so.

The kids have 'first breakfast' when they get up. So far this week, it's bee a
(relatively) healthy Organix oat bar, but we'd run out so this morning I
resorted to shortbread biscuits. (I hadn't had coffee, I wasn't thinking
straight.)

When everyone else was up, there was a quick second breakfast of cereal, then
John & Charlie headed out along the beach to search for more jet, having found
a few gems the previous day.

### Buttermilk Pancakes

Meanwhile, I got stuck into making some pancakes. Annabel had bought some
buttermilk when they were last at the shops, so I was aiming for buttermilk
pancakes. We were missing the bicarbonate of soda, but I was assured that just
made them taste of bicarbonate of soda anyway. The recipe worked out as:

* 300ml Buttermilk
* 150g plain flour
* 2 medium eggs
* a pinch of salt
* 50g melted butter

I hadn't appreciated how simple pancakes could be! I mixed the salt and the
flour together, melted the butter in a pan and cracked a couple of eggs into a
cup, whisking them a bit to break up the yolks. Then I combined all the
ingredients -- mixing the melted butter into the flour first, just to make sure
I took the heat out it a bit and didn't accidentally scramble the eggs.

I took to heart the two things I've read before about making buttermilk
pancakes: don't worry about lumps (I'd hazard a guess it's much like a roux, in
that the lumps are the flour trapped in fat), and don't stir too much because
it strengthens the glutens in the flour.

Once I'd made the batter, I left it alone for a while and nipped off for a
shower, waiting for the beachcombers to return.

I stuck half a dozen rashers of bacon under the grill, and fired up two frying
pans to cook the pancakes, getting four pancakes to each pan. It's always fun
trying to figure out quantities and densities in the pan, and cooking time and
suchlike. My pancakes were ... variable -- from blacked to barely browned --
but they all looked cooked, at least.

The pancakes were served naked, along with a pile of bacon in the middle of the
table. People chose to pair the pancakes with bacon and maple syrup, or
blueberries and creme fraiche. Either way, they were well received.

### Spinach and Ricotta Canneloni

After breakfast, I got stuck straight into preparing for dinner. I was
following the mantra of taking my time and enjoying it, and there were a couple
of processes here I wasn't 100% comfortable with.

I'm sure the last time I made canneloni, I blanched lasagne sheets so they
could be curved to make the canneloni tubes. This time it was much simpler: it
turns out that Tesco sell ready made tubes. Winning. I spent a bit of time
lining up the tubes in various ovenproof dishes to see what I could use to cook
it. The biggest dish fitted eighteen tubes, and I had twenty four. That's OK, I
reasoned, I could make a separate one for the kids!

For the spinach and ricotta filling, I started out by melting 50g of butter, a
splash of garlic-infused olive oil, about 4 small cloves of garlic, diced, and
some grated nutmeg. I love the tiny wee graters that you get in the jars of
whole nutmeg! Once that was melted and bubbling, I started adding the spinach.
There was 600g of spinach to get through -- three bags! -- so I chucked in a
bag at a time, and let it wilt a bit so I had enough room for the next bag.

Once all the spinach was looking mushy, I chucked it into a bowl, including the
liquid and left it aside.

The next thing to think about was the tomato sauce. Following the lead from the
bolognese sauce, I started by sweating a diced carrot, a couple of chopped
celery sticks and half of a huge red onion. Again, I was aiming to sweat,
rather than fry, it, keeping the onion translucent rather than caramelising it.

To that I again added a pile of dried oregano, and some tomato paste, combined
them and let it sizzle for a few minutes. Finally, I dumped in two tins of plum
tomatoes and, after tasting it, a spoonful of demerara sugar. (Sometimes, as in
this case, the tomato sauce tastes a bit sharp. Adding some sugar takes the
edge off nicely.) I chopped up the plum tomatoes a bit with a spoon, then left
it to simmer for 20 minutes or so. At some point, I realised I had a pile of
basil stalks and chucked them in for good measure.

For some reason, I decided I wanted a smooth tomato sauce. I'm really not sure
why, but it seemed like a good idea at the time. There's a blender in the
kitchen. Well, it's a smoothie maker, but the principle -- the spinning blades
-- is the same. :) After I'd left the ragu simmering for twenty minutes, I
dumped it in the smoothie maker and blended it for a bit.

The result was still a little coarse for what I had in my head. I had this
great idea of sieving the result. So I painstakingly sieved the lot. What I
really needed was a **insert name of mesh cooking thing here** but I didn't have
one, so it was a case of trying to push the sauce through a metal sieve with a
spatula. It took a while, but the result looks smooth and tastes awesome (to
me, at least). It slightly worried me that the leftover bits tasted good, too,
but they definitely were stringy (hello celery) or bitty (hello tomato seeds).

I did vaguely worry about it being a bit thin -- maybe the stringy bits are
what provides the body. We shall see how that turns out.

While the tomato sauce was preparing, I continued with the spinach and ricotta
filling. It's pretty straightforward. Squeeze the liquid out of the spinach, a
handful at a time, keeping the juice from it (because it's buttery, garlicky,
spinach-ey deliciousness). Chop up the spinach finely. (I wish I'd paid more
attention to this as a wondered why I'd bother chopping this mushy spinach into
tiny bits. As it turns out, I suspect it would have made it so much easier to
fill the canneloni.) Then combine with the ricotta cheese and add back the
liquid. Give it a good mix, then taste and season.

This is where it gets interesting. How do I fill twenty four tubes with this
mixture? I contemplated it for a bit -- no point in rushing into a solution
that turns out to be a disaster! Eventually, I came up with the following:

* A Ziploc bag with the spinach and ricotta filling could have the bottom
  corner snipped off and turned into a piping bag; and

* I found a large ramekin-like container that meant I could stand up most of
  the tubes in at once, so they were vertical.

This worked reasonably well. I'd pipe some filling into each tube, then use a
knife to make sure it was properly pushed down (I didn't really want air bubble
filling half the canneloni!). Next time, I'll be more careful about snipping
the outlet to be smaller than the tubes, and I'll make sure the spinach is
chopped finely enough to pass through it easily.

Still, it worked, and I wound up with all but three tubes filled up.

Then I tried the last three tubes loose. Next time, that's how I'll do it.
Stick the piping bag in one end, hold it vaguely horizontally, and pipe in some
of the mixture. You can see if filling it, it's pretty straightforward and it's
easy to control. So, live and learn.

Now we've got a tomato sauce as a base, and twenty four canneloni tubes stuffed
with spinach and ricotta mixture. Time to combine!

The target oven dishes get a layer of the tomato sauce. I think the large dish
got too much tomato sauce -- it wound up drowning the canneloni -- but we shall
see. Then I popped in the filled canneloni. In the large dish, it wound up
looking like ... well, I thought it looked like the backbone of a fish. Annabel
thought it looked like something out of Alien. The leftovers that didn't fit
wound up in the smaller dish.

And that, unfortunately, is how I left it, on the work surface, waiting for the
finishing touches, while I disappeared off for a walk.

When I came back -- albeit four hours later -- the canneloni had started to
dry, and curl, and separate. Which doesn't look so good. So I decided to cover
it in the white sauce quickly to prevent it from drying any further.

The white sauce wound up as a fairly standard cheese sauce. There was 50 grams
each of butter and flour. As usual, I had a mild panic about them combining and
burning. Then I kept adding full cream milk until the consistency seemed about
right. I'd say it was about 500ml or so of milk, but it felt so good to just
add milk 'til it seemed right, instead of worrying about adding a particular
amount, then worrying about whether it was right or not.

After letting that bubble for a bit -- mostly because I hadn't prepared in
advance -- I added about 200g of grated cheese (a mixture of cheddar and gran
padano), and a little grated nutmeg. After they'd melted in, I tasted and added
salt/pepper.

Finally, I poured the white sauce over the two dishes. There was enough to
cover both, completely. That's not entirely what I was aiming for -- I'd been
hoping a bit of pasta would poke through and get crispy -- but we shall see.
Finally, I topped it with some mozarrella cheese and a bit more pepper. Now
it's just a case of chucking it in the oven, letting it brown, making a salad
and hoping for the best!

I feel like I've spent most of the day cooking. Or, at least, that cooking has
been the more rewarding, least stressful part of the day. When I'm in this
'mode', I really enjoy cooking alone, and I get really frustrated when people
offer to help or, much, much worse still, I wind up with an audience. When I'm
trying a new technique -- say piping filling in to canneloni tubes -- and there
are two kids asking what I'm doing, asking if they can have a taste, asking if
they can help, the bubble bursts a bit. It turns into a very different
activity.

I may have been a bit unsubtly grumpy about this...

## Sunday, 10th November

And maybe boiled ham for lunch before we all leave?
