---
layout: post
title: Getting Shit Done (mid-2013 edition)
---
I've been a (bad) student of the Getting Things Done&tm; philosophy for a long
time now. I still remember when I first read the original book. It was
September 2005, when I spent a week on the Greek island of Naxos with my
(not-quite, at that point) wife and father-in-law. I remember getting very
cross at the introduction, but resolving to stick with it.

Since then, I've fallen off the horse and gotten back on more often than I can
remember. That's more of a reflection of me than the system; when I follow it,
I'm more productive. I'm currently, mostly, on the horse and I've got a
specific system I work with. It largely involved three tools:

* [OmniFocus]() as my 'trusted system' which contains all the stuff I want to
  do.

* [EverNote]() which has a few roles. One is as a tickler file, one is as a
  general searchable store of material, and the final is as a daily journal.

* Pen and paper. Yeah, I know. How quaint. If it's any consolation, it's lots
  of different coloured pens, and sometimes it's Moleskine jotters.

So. How do I put together these tools in such a way that I know what I would
like to be doing *right now*? Well, I've been reading a pile of different
things over the years, about flow, about software development methodologies,
and about getting stuff done. What I've wound up with is something of a mix of
these tools. I hope it's an effective blend of these methodologies, rather than
me picking and choosing what I like from each, losing the whole. I'd appreciate
your feedback.

## Trusted System

OmniFocus acts as my trusted system. Anything I need to do, or would like to do
at some point, or currently think I might like to do, goes in there. I keep it
running all the time on my laptop, and any time I think of something else I
need to do, or have an idea about something, I hit `ctrl-alt-space`, write it
down and carry on. Whatever I've captured winds up in my inbox.

Similarly, when I'm dealing with other inboxes (email, Twitter messages, GitHub
notifications, SMS messages, bits of paper, iPhone photos, voicemails, oh dear,
I have too many inboxes!), I have a very simple system:

* If it can be dealt with in a couple of minutes (in other words, the
  processing overhead would be a significant portion of the overall task time),
  then I just deal with it.

* Otherwise, it goes into my OmniFocus inbox so that it can be triaged and
  dealt with appropriately.

So every non-trivial task that I do winds up in my trusted system. When I'm out
and about, I can easily capture tasks with my iPhone or iPad. In principle, I
could talk to Siri and my reminders would be consumed by OmniFocus, but I've
still to convince Siri to understand my Scottish accent, especially after a
beer or two.

Capture is sorted. Once I've captured everything new, the next stage is to sort
things in to projects and actionable items that take that project towards
completion.

### Projects

So, what is a project? A project in terms of Getting Things Done is a smaller
thing than you might think. It's just something where there's more than one
atomic action needed to take it to completion. "Atomic" is perhaps too strong,
but it's definitely something that feels indivisible, and that you can do in a
single session. Personally, I find it's better to split a project into really
small tasks, than it is to have a single 'task' that lingers for days.

The trouble is that I end up with a lot of projects. After all, "change my
bike's rear tyre" is, strictly speaking, a project. Before I can actually
perform the repair, I need to buy a new inner tube, and I need to get the inner
tube and tools into the office, where my poor bike with its flat back tyre is
languishing. Then, and only then, can I actually change the tyre on my bike
(and then cycle home instead of taking the bus!)

### Context

That brings up the idea of context. It's an important concern in Getting Things
Done, but I personally find it less significant. Most of the resources I need
to do the things I need to do are "my computer", and "my computer with Internet
access". There are others -- being out and about, making phone calls, being at
home or being in the office -- but I'm currently quite relaxed about contexts.
If I need a scarce resource to complete a task, that's the context. Otherwise,
I tend to categorise it as being work ('Office') or personal ('Anywhere',
because I occasionally do personal things in my 'lunch hour', too).

### OMG IT'S FULL OF PROJECTS!!!1!

Back to projects. I'm not so bad at realising that a tasks has multiple actions
and, therefore, is a project. However, I'm sometimes resistant to breaking a
project down into multiple actions because it generates yet another project.
This winds up with a lot of project. I mean a lot.
