---
layout: post
title: Pomodoro wishlist
---
I go in and out of phases of using The Pomodoro Technique to maintain some
focus during the day. When I do use it, it works well. When I find myself
slipping out of the habit, it's usually because I'm mentally resisting doing
something (for whatever reason).

But wait, step back a second, what *is* The Pomodoro Technique anyway? It's a
system developed by Francesco Cirillo to help manage your time and maintain
focus. The basic outline is pretty simple:

1. Pick the most important task that deserves your undivided attention right
   now. It can be a big task, or a small one, the size isn't important.

2. Set a timer for 25 minutes and commit to yourself that you will spend the
   next 25 minutes working on this task without interruption. If it's a small
   task, you might complete it in the 25 minute period. If it's a big task,
   well, at least you're 25 minutes closer to completing it.

3. Until the timer rings, keep your focus on that task. If there's an
   interruption, write it down, forget about it and carry on with what you were
   doing.

4. When the timer rings, put a check next to the task to say you've
   successfully completed a Pomodoro on the task.

5. Get up out your chair and go for a wander. Take a 5 minute break.

6. Reassess your current list of priorities (particularly if an interruption
   came in), pick the most important thing that now deserves your attention and
   repeat the processes.

7. Every few Pomodoros, take a proper break. Go out for a walk, get some fresh
   air, have a natter with colleagues. Spend about 30 minutes away from the
   computer.

It's pretty straightforward and doesn't require any tools, just writing
materials and a timer. The author of The Pomodoro Technique specifically
recommends a mechanical kitchen timer because it makes a real ticking sound
when it's counting down. (And he sells them, but to be fair he was recommending
them for a long time before that!)

Being a geek, I'm naturally interested in using technology to solve problems.
After all, if Ruby on Rails Web 2.0 Single Site JS applications are my hammer,
then *everything* starts to look like a world wide web of thumbs. And I'm
clearly not the only one. There are dozens of applications for the Mac, web,
iPhone and iPad that allow you to set a 25 minute countdown timer. Some of them
look prettier than others. Some have extra whizz-bang features. (Very few use
the word 'Pomodoro' as I suspect somebody is keen on protecting the name from
infringement.)

However, I haven't found any that track and reflect on the most interesting
thing: the data that the system can allow us to collect.

## Additional Tools

Step back another second. While the basic Pomodoro Technique is simple, there
are a few extra bits we can put in place to give ourselves rich data on our
efficiency and patterns.

### Activity Inventory Sheet

This is a collection of all the things that you need to do. It's your Trusted
System in Getting Things Done, your Master Task List in What Matters Most. It's
your external brain with respect to all the things you currently know you need
to do. Personally, I use OmniFocus as my GTD-like trusted system here, because
it offers plenty of flexibility in organisation and helps me with recall.

However you do it, this is the pool of all the tasks you need to complete. It's
almost certainly going to be long, will always keep growing rather than
shrinking, and may well be extremely daunting, which doesn't make it a terribly
useful thing to be staring at all day.

If you have additional information about particular activities -- say they must
be deferred until a particular date, must be completed to a deadline, or you
have an estimate of how long they're going to take -- then you can record that
information here. It's not *necessary* to record such information, though, so
don't feel the need to create artificial deadlines for items just because
there's a deadline column.

### To Do Today

This is the list of things that you're committing to spending time on today.
The key word is 'commitment', and that's how your daily list is different from
a regular todo list. By selecting a number of activities to move to it, you are
committing to spending time on those activities. You are also committing to
*not* spending time on the other activities you didn't transfer across.

In my morning planning session, I'll typically select a couple of high level
goals for the day, usually based on the calendar. For example, on a normal
Wednesday in November (not that there have been any so far!), my goals would
look like:

> #### Goals
>
> * Make progress on Project `B` for client `L`.
>
> * Write my NaNoWriMo quota for the day.
>
> * Go rock climbing.

Based on the shape of the day, and how many Pomodoro I've completed on other,
similar, days, I then estimate how many Pomodoro I'm going to successfully
complete today. (The number of Pomodoros that I can successfully complete in a
single day is entirely context sensitive. Sometimes, I can fire through 12 of
them if I get a super-focused, completely uninterrupted, day in the office.
Other times, if my day is full of meetings, or I'm relaxing with the family,
I'll fit in just one or two.)

Armed with all this information, I can then select the most important tasks
from my activity inventory sheet that I could be working on today. At this
point, if I am selecting an activity where I haven't estimated the number of
Pomodoros it will take to complete the task, I'll do that now. The estimation
is useful here, along with the estimation of how many Pomodoros you reckon
you'll achieve today, because it gives you an idea of how many tasks you can
successfully commit to today.

If I find that I have tasks that are estimated to take more Pomodoros than I
typically fit into a day, that's a sign I want to be breaking it down into more
fine-grained tasks.

So then I'll wind up with an activity list along the lines of:

> ### Activities
>
> Estimated Pomodoro for today: 8
>
> 1. Automatically open Site -> Buyer invoices when a sale is completed. (2/4)
>
> 2. Research SagePay Token system to see if there's a simple way we can
>    integrate with it. (1)
>
> 3. Investigate this Airbrake error. (1)
>
> 4. Write up some notes on my use of the Pomodoro technique for NaNoWriMo. (3)
>
> 5. Catch up with business banking in FreeAgent. (1)

The one thing I've illustrated here that I haven't mentioned before is that
sometimes I'll deliberately split a task over multiple days, just for balance.
That's the case with activity 1 here, where I estimate there are 4 Pomodoro
remaining to complete it, but I'm only intending to commit to doing two of them
today before moving on. The activities are written in what I currently consider
to be priority order, though the priorities are reassessed at the start of each
Pomodoro, so can change.

The final section on my todo today sheet is just a header, written in red ink:

> ### Unplanned and Urgent

This is where I'll record activities that I work on through the course of the
day that I hadn't planned to at the start of the day. This can include external
interruptions like client requests that require a rapid response, or fire
fighting production issues. It can also include internal interruptions -- often
things that didn't jump from my trusted system to my todo today list that
should have done so, or plain procrastination.

With that, I've already completed my first Pomodoro of the day -- a planning
Pomodoro -- so I can reward myself with a wander to the kitchen for a coffee
and a five minute break. I deliberately use a Pomodoro for planning my day for
another reason: time boxing. I've got a deadline to work to for processing my
inboxes, reviewing my trusted system and planning my day, so I don't waste half
the day doing it!

## Capture during the day

As I'm working through the day, the Pomodoro Technique has me capture some
additional information about what's happened during the day in order to reflect
back, learn and improve. I have:

* The number of Pomodoros I've successfully completed for an activity. This is
  represented on my todo today list as a thick green tick next to the activity
  for each Pomodoro I've completed.

* Whether that activity has been finished. I represent this on my to do list by
  scoring through the activity with a ruler-drawn black line. This is somewhat
  satisfying. :)

* The number of interruptions sustained during an activity. These fall into two
  categories:

  * Internal interruptions, where my brain goes off on a tangent, or I suddenly
    thing of something else I need to be doing. Most often, it's going off on a
    tangent to the activity I'm supposed to be focusing on just now, usually
    when I catch a piece of unrelated code in the corner of my eye, go 'WTF,
    seriously?!' and want to fix it. I just note down the cause of the
    interruption in the inbox of my trusted system, put a little mark against
    the activity I'm working on to indicate an internal interruption, and carry
    on, hopefully having not lost too much flow.

  * External interruptions, where something else grabs my attention. Usually
    it's my phone, but sometimes it's the pinging sound of my email distracting
    me enough that I can't help having a look (switch email off!), or a
    colleague popping across for a chat. If I can, I'll just note the cause of
    the interruption in my trusted system's inbox. If it's urgent and needs
    dealing with today, I'll stick it on the "unplanned and urgent" section of
    my todo today list. I'll make a different mark next to the activity on my
    todo today list to indicate an external interruption, then carry on.

* The number of abandoned Pomodoros. Sometimes, having suffered an
  interruption, it's enough to have lost focus on what you're doing. That makes
  the Pomodoro void. I note these down next to the task with a thick red 'X',
  as well as recording the correct interruption mark, then take a five minute
  break as I usually would at the end of the Pomodoro. And then start again.

There's a decent amount of information captured there, which allows me to
reflect at the end of the day whether it's been a productive day, or if there
are specific things I could do to improve my productivity/focus tomorrow
(turning off email on my phone, too, for example!). It also allows me to
reflect on the accuracy of my estimates, and whether I would like to feed that
back into future estimates.

There are a couple of other pieces of information I'd like to capture:

* How long I actually spend on a single Pomodoro, rather than the 25 minutes
  I'm supposed to spend on it. I quite often stretch out Pomodoros for longer
  than the proscribed time -- "I'll just finish this wee bit off before I
  break", which then stretches out for another 25 minutes. I'd like to see
  whether there's some useful optimisation in the length of Pomodoros for me,
  personally.

* When I take breaks, and how long I break for. This can be a dangerous thing.
  If I'm having a distractable day, breaks will often become the places where I
  procrastinate before getting on with the next Pomodoro. Having spent four
  minutes making a coffee, I still have a minute to go, so I check out Digg
  Reader. 20 minutes later, well after the break alarm has gone, I'm still
  sitting reading RSS feeds.

* Patterns of Pomodoros through the day. Do I always wind up voiding the
  Pomodoro immediately after lunch due to an internal interruption? What times
  of the day do I most successfully crunch through the Pomodoros? (If I had to
  guess, for me, it's first thing in the morning and last thing in the working
  day, with a lull in the middle. I'd like data to back that up.)

And more, I'm sure.
